docs: Custom Field outline (#5536)
recognai/rubrix: argilla/docs/how_to_guides/custom_fields.md

---
description: Learn how to create custom fields using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript templates in Argilla.
---

> # Custom fields with JavaScript, HTML and CSS templates

Reviewer: The title is slightly misleading because the user doesn't need all of this to make a template. Personally, i think something functional would attract more users to it. 

```suggestion
# Custom fields with layout templates
```

That said, maybe there's appeal in the languages to web developers.

This guide demonstrates how to create custom fields in Argilla using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript templates.

!!! info "Main Class"

    ```python
    rg.CustomField(
        name="custom",
        title="Custom",
        template="<div>{{record.fields.custom.key}}</div>",
        advanced_mode=False,
        required=True,
        description="Field description",
    )
    ```

    > Check the [CustomField - Python Reference](../reference/argilla/settings/fields.md#src.argilla.settings._field.CustomField) to see the attributes, arguments, and methods of the `CustomField` class in detail.

## Understanding the Record Object

> If you are somewhat familiar with web development and thestructure of resources in Argilla, you might will easiliy be able to grasp the `record` object structure you can access within your custom fields definition.The `record` object is the main object that contains all the information about the resource, like `fields`, `metadata`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `record` object is the main object that contains all the information about the Argilla `record` object in the UI, like `fields`, `metadata`, etc. Your template can use this object to display record information within the custom field.
```

> ## Basic Mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using Handlebars in your template
```

> When `advanced_mode=False`, you can use the `template` argument to only pass basic HTML and CSS templates. To render information, we rely on the [handlebars syntax engine](https://handlebarsjs.com/). This engine will convert the content inside the brackets `{{}}` to the values of record's field's object within your template. As described in the [Accessing record information](#accessing-record-information) section, you can access the fields of the record by navigating to `{{record.fields.<field_name>}}`. For more complex use cases, handlebars has various [expressions, partials, and helpers](https://handlebarsjs.com/guide/) that you can use to render your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, custom fields will use the [handlebars syntax engine](https://handlebarsjs.com/) to render templates with `record` information. This engine will convert the content inside the brackets `{{}}` to the values of record's field's object that you reference within your template. As described in the [Accessing record information](#accessing-record-information) section, you can access the fields of the record by navigating to `{{record.fields.<field_name>}}`. For more complex use cases, handlebars has various [expressions, partials, and helpers](https://handlebarsjs.com/guide/) that you can use to render your data. You can deactivate the `handlebars` engine with the `advanced_mode=False` parameter in `CustomField`, then you will need to define custom javascript to access the record attributes.
```

The last sentence could be in a note box with a link to the section below? Or even just not mentioned here?

> ### Minimal example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Usage example
```

)

settings = rg.Settings(
    fields=[custom_field],
    questions=[rg.TextQuestion(name="response")],
)

dataset = rg.Dataset(
    name="custom_field_dataset",
    settings=settings,
)

dataset.records.log(
    rg.Record(
        fields={
            "custom": {"key": "value"},
        }
    )
)
```

### Example Gallery

=== "Show texts in two columns"

    ```python
    template = """
	  <style>
	    #container {
	      display: flex;
	      gap: 10px;
	    }
	    .column {
	      flex: 1;
	    }
	  </style>
	  <div id="container">
	    <div class="column">
	      <h3>Original text</h3>
	      <div>{{record.fields.text.original}}</div>
	    </div>
	    <div class="column">
	      <h3>Revision</h3>
	      <div>{{record.fields.text.revision}}</div>
	    </div>
	  </div>
    """
    record_object = rg.Record(
        fields={
            "text": {
                "original": "Hello, world!",
                "revision": "Hello, Argilla!",
            }
        }
    )
    ```

## Advanced Mode

When `advanced_mode=True`, you can use the `template` argument to pass a full HTML page. This allows for more complex customizations, including the use of JavaScript.

> ### Minimal example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Usage example
```

### Usage example

Because of the handlebars syntax engine, we only need to pass the HTML and potentially some CSS in between the `<style>` tags.

```python
css_template = """
<style>
#container {
    display: flex;
    gap: 10px;
}
.column {
    flex: 1;
}
</style>
""" # (1)

html_template = """
<div id="container">
    <div class="column">
        <h3>Original</h3>
        <img src="{{record.fields.image.original}}" />
    </div>
    <div class="column">
        <h3>Revision</h3>
        <img src="{{record.fields.image.revision}}" />
    </div>
</div>
""" # (2)
```

1. This is a CSS template, which ensures that the container and columns are styled.
2. This is an HTML template, which creates a `container` with two columns and injects the value corresponding to the `key` of the `image` field into it.

We can now pass these templates to the `CustomField` class.

```python
import argilla as rg

custom_field = rg.CustomField(

>     name="image",

Reviewer 2: Having name dependency between field names, templates, and records can be a source of errors. Maybe using the custom dict values inside the template when `advanced_mode=False` could help to mitigate this.

Author: @frascuchon what do you mean_ renaming this to custom?

Reviewer 2: I mean users must be aware of using the same custom name everywhere. But I think it is fine as is. An alternative could expose, in addition to the record object, the custom dictionary inside the template so users can reference custom variables without the `records.fields.custom` prefix.
````
src={{original}}
src={{revision}}
````

But it's okay.

    ```python
    template = """
    <style>
        .container {
            border: 1px solid #ddd;
            font-family: sans-serif;
        }
        .row {
            display: flex;
            border-bottom: 1px solid #ddd;
        }
        .row:last-child {
            border-bottom: none;
        }
        .column {
            flex: 1;
            padding: 8px;
        }
        .column:first-child {
            border-right: 1px solid #ddd;
        }
    </style>
    <div class="container">
        <div class="header">
            <div class="column">Metadata</div>
            <div class="column">Value</div>
        </div>
        {{#each record.metadata}}
        <div class="row">
            <div class="column">{{@key}}</div>
            <div class="column">{{this}}</div>
        </div>
        {{/each}}
    </div>
    """
    record = rg.Record(
        fields={"text": "hello"},
        metadata={
            "name": "John Doe",
            "age": 25,
        }
    )
    ```
    ![example-gallery-end](../assets/images/how_to_guides/custom_field/metadata_table.png)

??? "JSON/Code viewer"

    ```python
    import argilla as rg
    ```

## Advanced Mode

> When `advanced_mode=True`, you can use the `template` argument to pass a full HTML page. This allows for more complex customizations, including the use of JavaScript. The record object will be available in the global scope, so you can access it in your JavaScript code as described in the [Record Object](#record-object) section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `advanced_mode=True`, you can use the `template` argument to pass a full HTML page. This allows for more complex customizations, including the use of JavaScript. The record object will be available in the global scope, so you can access it in your JavaScript code as described in the [Record Object](#understanding-the-record-object) section.
```

---
description: Learn how to create custom fields using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript templates in Argilla.
---

# Custom fields with layout templates

This guide demonstrates how to create custom fields in Argilla using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript templates.

!!! info "Main Class"

    ```python
    rg.CustomField(
        name="custom",
        title="Custom",
        template="<div>{{record.fields.custom.key}}</div>",
        advanced_mode=False,
        required=True,
        description="Field description",
    )
    ```

    > Check the [CustomField - Python Reference](../reference/argilla/settings/fields.md#src.argilla.settings._field.CustomField) to see the attributes, arguments, and methods of the `CustomField` class in detail.

## Understanding the Record Object

The `record` object is the main object that contains all the information about the Argilla `record` object in the UI, like `fields`, `metadata`, etc. Your template can use this object to display record information within the custom field.

## Using Handlebars in your template

> By default, custom fields will use the [handlebars syntax engine](https://handlebarsjs.com/) to render templates with `record` information. This engine will convert the content inside the brackets `{{}}` to the values of record's field's object that you reference within your template. As described in the [Accessing record information](#accessing-record-information) section, you can access the fields of the record by navigating to `{{record.fields.<field_name>}}`. For more complex use cases, handlebars has various [expressions, partials, and helpers](https://handlebarsjs.com/guide/) that you can use to render your data. You can deactivate the `handlebars` engine with the `advanced_mode=False` parameter in `CustomField`, then you will need to define custom javascript to access the record attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, custom fields will use the [handlebars syntax engine](https://handlebarsjs.com/) to render templates with `record` information. This engine will convert the content inside the brackets `{{}}` to the values of record's field's object that you reference within your template. As described in the [Accessing record information](#accessing-record-information) section, you can access the fields of the record by navigating to `{{record.fields.<field_name>}}`. For more complex use cases enable the advanced mode with the `advanced_mode=True` parameter in `CustomField`, then you will need to define custom javascript to access the record attributes.
```

Reviewer 2: Also, I think we should discourage users from using other fields to render inside the template. So, maybe we can redefine the variable name  something like `records.fields.<custom_field>`

### Usage example

Because of the handlebars syntax engine, we only need to pass the HTML between `<script>` tags and potentially some CSS in

> between the `<style>` tags.

Reviewer 3: I meant, for instance, these lines. Maybe they were the unique missed.

```python
css_template = """
<style>
#container {
    display: flex;
    gap: 10px;
}
.column {
    flex: 1;
}
</style>
""" # (1)

html_template = """
<div id="container">
    <div class="column">
        <h3>Original</h3>
        <img src="{{record.fields.custom.original}}" />
    </div>
    <div class="column">
        <h3>Revision</h3>

>         <img src="{{record.fields.custom.revision}}" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <img src="{{record.fields.image.original}}" />
    </div>
    <div class="column">
        <h3>Revision</h3>
        <img src="{{record.fields.image.revision}}" />
```

    </div>
</div>
""" # (2)
```

1. This is a CSS template, which ensures that the container and columns are styled.
2. This is an HTML template, which creates a `container` with two columns and injects the value corresponding to the `key` of the `image` field into it.

We can now pass these templates to the `CustomField` class.

```python
import argilla as rg

custom_field = rg.CustomField(

>     name="custom",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    name="image",
```

    template=css_template + html_template,

>     advanced_mode=False

Reviewer 2: Since this is the default value, I would say to remove for basic examples
```suggestion
```

)

settings = rg.Settings(
    fields=[custom_field],
    questions=[rg.TextQuestion(name="response")],
)

dataset = rg.Dataset(
    name="custom_field_dataset",
    settings=settings,

> )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
).create()
```

dataset.records.log(
    record = rg.Record(
        fields={
            "image": {
                "original": "https://argilla.io/brand-assets/argilla/argilla-logo-color-black.png",
                "revision": "https://argilla.io/brand-assets/argilla/argilla-logo-black.png",
            }
        }
    )

> )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dataset.records.log([
    rg.Record(
        fields={
            "image": {
                "original": "https://argilla.io/brand-assets/argilla/argilla-logo-color-black.png",
                "revision": "https://argilla.io/brand-assets/argilla/argilla-logo-black.png",
            }
        }
    )]
)
```

    ```python
    template = """
    <style>
        .container {
            border: 1px solid #ddd;
            font-family: sans-serif;
        }
        .row {
            display: flex;
            border-bottom: 1px solid #ddd;
        }
        .row:last-child {
            border-bottom: none;
        }
        .column {
            flex: 1;
            padding: 8px;
        }
        .column:first-child {
            border-right: 1px solid #ddd;
        }
    </style>
    <div class="container">
        <div class="header">
            <div class="column">Metadata</div>
            <div class="column">Value</div>
        </div>
        {{#each record.metadata}}
        <div class="row">
            <div class="column">{{@key}}</div>
            <div class="column">{{this}}</div>
        </div>
        {{/each}}
    </div>
    """
    record = rg.Record(
        fields={"text": "hello"},
        metadata={
            "name": "John Doe",
            "age": 25,
        }
    )
    ```
    ![example-gallery-end](../assets/images/how_to_guides/custom_field/metadata_table.png)

??? "JSON viewer"

>     If you want to display a JSON object, you can use the `json` helper to convert the object to a string.

Author: I think we might add a bit of context here. Maybe we we can also guide people to using their own helpers or how this relies on handlebars under the hood?

Reviewer: I'll add some links and extra context.
